Hi everyone, welcome to this week's episode of Fish. Before we get going, we just want to let you
know that we have a very special guest on this week. So Andy's off away, God knows where, but in
his place we have the wonderful Robin Ince. If you're not aware of Robin Ince, you can't really
call yourself a true nerd. Robin is the great godfather of nerdery. He is the co-host of the
brilliant Infinite Monkey Cage, the BBC Radio 4 show with Brian Cox. He is also the person who
sort of gathers together all the dorks and geeks of the UK and gives them a platform and a place to
be heard. One of those places is called CosmicShambles.com. Robin of course as well is an author. He's
published numerous books in his latest book. The Importance of Being Interested, Adventures in
Scientific Curiosity, is coming out this October, the 7th of October. Do get it, he's an amazing
writer. I've read all of his previous books and I can't wait to read this one as well. Also he's
going to be doing something quite astounding to promote the book. He is going on a hundred date
tour of the UK to all the independent bookshops around the UK to do little talks and signings and
so on and you can find the dates for those on CosmicShambles.com/100Bookshops and honestly
you must see Robin Ince live. He's such a wonder to behold. He is such a fantastic guy and a really
nice guy on top of everything else. We've wanted him on the show for years. We're so glad we finally
got him so we hope you enjoy this episode. Do get his book, The Importance of Being Interested,
but for now enjoy him on No Such Thing as a Fish. On with the show.
Hello and welcome to another episode of No Such Thing as a Fish, a weekly podcast coming to you
from four undisclosed locations in the UK. My name is Dan Schreiber. I'm sitting here with Anna
Tyshinski, James Harkin and special guest it is Robin Ince and once again we have gathered
around the microphones with our four favorite facts from the last seven days and in no particular
order here we go. Starting with fact number one that is Robin. The Nobel Prize winning scientist
Richard Feynman was allowed to investigate the entirety of the universe except the Aurora
Borealis which is a very beautiful thing. It has a beautiful story attached to it which is the fact
that his sister Joan loved science. This is one of the few times that golf courses play an interesting
part in the future of physics. Now this might be entirely wrong. One of the great lines about golf
courses is Steve Eyelit, the writer who once said the only proof of the existence of God is that once
a year a golfer is electrocuted in a thunderstorm. Oh God I can feel James getting wound up as you're
speaking. But think of all those golfers who don't get hit by lightning. I know how evil is the one
who God decides must die. So what's this about golf? I'm really interested. What's golf? Well
in fact actually I've realised there is a oh no there is another golf link to science which is
Fred Hoyle's steady state theory was partly influenced by the Ealing horror film Portmanteau
horror film Dead of Night but we can get back to that I think at another time. No let's let's go there
and let's end this whole section on you finally explaining your facts going along. It's like the
other day I was doing a show about reality and I suddenly realised that Alice Cooper connected
everything that I was going to talk about and this is the trouble isn't it with tangential thinking.
But yeah Portmanteau horror film Dead of Night and I warn you there's a spoiler alert here so if
you haven't seen it yet it did come out in 1945 but if you haven't seen it yet I'm going to give
out something about it at the end. So it's about a man who visits a house and when he gets to the
house he's like I'm sure I've been here before and everyone in the house has a different story
including a terrifying story involving a ventriloquist possessed by his dummy or not we're not entirely
sure played by Michael Redgrove and there's also a beautiful golfing story from the great
Basil Radford and Norton Wayne two golfers who play golf to win over a woman's heart and it all
goes horribly wrong but at the end of the film the man wakes up from his terrible nightmare and has
to drive to the house which we then realise is the house where we began and he is in this cycle
of reality and that led to Fred Hoyle thinking about now the theory of the universe this kind of
cycle of size that we see so um to that I've suddenly realised is the other place golfing
actually may have played a much bigger part in refuted physics of the 20th century so first
of all I'd like to apologise I'm not normally on this show as everyone realises so I tell you the
story now I'm sorry this is so yes so basically that's the thing Robin the problem with golf is
there's links oh man I can't believe it's five minutes to a pun but when one like that comes out
that is fantastic what a beautiful fantasy these two had practiced that for hours beforehand it's
worth the build up I can't even remember what the golf link was so Joan Feynman woke up his
young sister Joan and took her to the golf course because this was the darkest place to go because
that night they could witness from just outside New York the Aurora Borealis and a deal was made
and the deal was he could have the whole of the rest of the universe to investigate but Joan
was allowed to have the Aurora Borealis and he could not go near it we should just explain who
Richard Feynman was he was an extraordinary character in the world of science the Nobel prize
winning physicist he was very much one of the fathers of quantum mechanics and as a child the
stories that you have to read his autobiography and um genius by James Glyke it is just full of him
just doing experiments including on his sitster and so he rigged up her cot so that it was sort of
electrically generated so that it would go back and forth he paid her pocket money four cents to
be sticking her finger in electrical sockets and sorry dad I think she was paid to press switches
and she might have put her finger in the socket just for fun to kind of show off to his friends right
I don't think he paid her well some reports from her are that he would occasionally say when his
friends were around pop your finger in that so I think there's there's some wonderful interviews
that she did with Christopher Sykes who was the maker of Pleasure of Finding Things Out the
horizon documentary about Richard Feynman and she just talks about its play you know even in her 90s
when someone would say what is science Joan she said it's play and it's something that gets missed
out so much in a lot of the science education in the UK you know I'm sure all of us have the
experience of working with scientists and we're asking the excitement when they see a new idea
or they see a new snail shell it's filled with excitement and play and joy I like that it extends
to going to the cinema and watching ealing horrors and you come out going oh I've just invented a
model of how the universe functions I like how golf tells you a lot about physics as well okay I
can I can now see that Dan's gonna go to the cinema and James is gonna go to the golf course both
expecting to come back Nobel Prize winners and you're gonna be sorely disappointed so Richard
Feynman was great at encouraging science communication right and this is obviously partly what
inspired Joan and he even used to come into her room at night kind of annoying actually
for instance she'd cry out for a glass of water in the middle of the night and he'd come to her
bedroom and rather than give her the water he'd always swill it around in the glass apparently
to demonstrate centrifugal forces which does sound annoying and also at one point it did fly out of
his hand and smash against the wall so fun fun and dangerous Richard was very very supportive of her
but the world wasn't when she was trying to do her dissertation one of the professors who was
teaching her said why don't you write it on cobwebs because that's going to help when you're
cleaning houses you mean sorry you mean why don't you write about cobwebs right not on as in sort of
like trying in a tiny tiny pen yeah it turns out he was really supportive when he was trying to innovate
and she actually wrote it in the end on the absorption of infrared radiation in crystals
of diamond type lattice structure just kind of cobwebs infrared radiation it's not much
I've got to be honest and I don't want to be the bad guy here but I would have been more likely to
read the cobwebs one than the lattice structure one just small catchy isn't it I love a cobweb
ironically that phd dissertation is now covered in cobwebs I didn't know he's never read it have
but no she was brilliant yeah and the mother was quite progressive but still said to her
oh women don't have the minds to do science you know that's how deep the belief was she was only
eight when her mum said women don't have the brains for science and she sort of sat in her chair
sobbing incessantly which is quite impressive at eight no you want to be a scientist I think
all I knew was I wanted to climb a tree yeah I think there's an interesting thing to learn from
both the Feynman's here in terms of looking at progress Richard Feynman didn't get into his first
choice university because at that point in the 1930s there was a Jewish quota and that is an
incredible thing to know I think and in the same way what Joan Feynman had to deal with was also
the fact that women can't do this and we're not going to allow and sometimes even as a professional
scientist there were rooms where she was told oh women aren't allowed to go up there and she had
but she did keep on trying to get into the men's bathroom didn't she which but that was only because
her brother kept coming into her bed yeah and she was only going into the men's bathroom show
centrifugal force which of course made a right old mess but in a men's bathroom you can't really
tell that much because they're always in such a state in the first place but I think the importance
of role models it must not be forgotten because I think in science this is still going on it's getting
better but we still need that going on all of the time because science is for everyone and it would
be crazy not to realize that you know the excitement of curiosity is not limited by you know an x or
a y chromosome yeah yeah I think she had an amazing psychiatrist actually because she went to a
psychiatrist to say what shall I do whereas usually I guess you'd say have these antidepressants and
maybe try some CBT the psychiatrist basically said why don't you apply to this earth observatory at
Columbia University and that's what you need isn't it so great psychiatry is terrible rabbi
because the rabbi said what right do you have to have these science jobs that are meant for men some
of them haven't got a job so there we go there's a great the battle there some of them haven't got a
job you've got to wait till all the men have a job and then you can start applying should we talk
about what she discovered because it was pretty cool I mean she did hog quite a cool thing and
hogging the auroras she essentially realized that it was these kind of charged particles that are
flying out of the sun and when the sun's having a particularly turbulent time when there's a
little bunch of storms on the surface of the sun then the northern lights get bigger and so she
equated those two and thought one must be causing the other and I hadn't actually realized these
cycles that the sun goes through it's got an 11 year cycle of high and low activity and that's
caused by its magnetic poles switching around every 11 years which is very often given the earth
it has been ages hasn't it since we did it but also it's got this 88 year cycle that's kind of
running underneath that where the 11 year peaks and troughs kind of get higher and lower there is
another cycle that I know of which is there's always a trough whenever I go to Iceland to see
the northern lights which has been on two occasions and every single time they were like oh if you
were here last week it was amazing see I think that that's a correlation causation issue I don't
know if your presence is causing a difference you have to time it right because if they know that
Joanna Lumley is going to be making one of her documentaries where she goes I've always been
fascinated in the aurora borealis then the magnetosphere the solar winds go hold back
Joanna Lumley is coming next week James is mainly doing audio based stuff it's really not important
to get involved um do you know what the oldest depiction of the northern nights is we think
is it like on a cave painting well it is but it's specifically a macaroni
a penguin snow no so this is a cave painting it's 30 000 years old which is very cool I'm
not convinced it's the northern lights because you know when you look at cave paintings and it
all looks like smears on a cave and then everyone goes well this is clearly a walrus and this is a
aurora borealis but these are chromagnon cave paintings in France and it's a specific type
of paleolithic finger tracings in clay which is called macaroni which I'd never heard of so the
first northern nights is a macaroni but it is quite remarkable when you think you know that cave
whether it's true or not and I think your right to probably be skeptical because there's so much
new investigation in terms of what cave paintings mean but I do think you know that that moment of
experiencing something like that I don't know if you ever went there with the tape modern
about probably 15 years ago there was an artist who created this piece which was basically just the
sun rising and what he wanted to create was something that had the impact of what it must
have been like each morning to see this thing which you know was almost like a godlike experience
and he did really create that I've got to say standing in that turbine hall the way that it
connected to was just remarkable and when you talk about the aurora borealis I think you know
I've never experienced it I'm I had the same as you in Iceland I think Paul O'Grady was going to
be there the next week so the aurora borealis stayed off for me as well but that experience
should really hit you in the gut every now and again to go that is up there what is going on
how is it that a universe exists that creates these things that we have somehow evolved to find
beautiful and fascinating and mesmeric yeah although I had exactly the same thing as you
too in Norway so I'm starting to suspect the northern lights actually don't exist and it's a huge
conspiracy okay it is time for fact number two and that is Anna my fact this week is that at the
turn of the 20th century women wore pedometers to balls to track how many miles they were dancing
well miles a single ball that's a lot of dancing isn't it oh god they were dancing
miles and miles well one dance was about a mile a mile and a half and this was all the rage women
would strap pedometers to their knees or their feet and they'd go to a ball and there would be
competitions over who would dance a furthest so you'd show your pedometer at the end of the night
and I think the winner of one contestor was reading dance 25 miles in a night wow which
that girl has not gone without a partner for the evening yeah with these those those dancers
whereas a big group they were dancing together with a one-on-one with partners you know partner
dancers at the balls yeah you're technically supposed to be going I think to find a husband
back in the day it was a debutante era but one of the complaints about the pedometers in one of
the newspaper articles I read is that it was distracting the women from seducing their husbands
because they were so into counting their number of steps and competing over that that they forgot
to do their duty that's amazing did anyone sort of just quickly leave the venue and just go for a
mad dash you know and just clock up the numbers and come back was there I don't I don't think a mad
dash would help because dancing you're dancing almost as fast as you I mean you can't really
run for 25 miles straight true have you just watched the marathon just watched the Olympic
marathon that's just happened I just think it's much harder in heels and a corset it's probably
easier to do a bit of jigging do you think that in the bathrooms when you went into the ladies
bathroom everyone would just be kind of jiggling around to keep the pedometer going you know like
if you really need the toilet you kind of do that little jiggly run on the spot don't you
that's where that comes from actually yeah yeah what would be the best tap dancing I guess would be
the most or like river dance yeah definitely you're wasting a lot of leg time in the air though
with one of them legs well I think a ska music festival would work very well because you would
something like lip up fatty from the band bad manners there's a lot of movement as in which is
kind of a walkie movement so I would say if you perhaps set up this experiment in a series of
different butlins holiday camps across the south coast you would take various different genres I
think northern soul would go well but northern soul as you said before the high kick element of
that possibly means that you're not traveling as far as you imagine that the leg is going high but
it's only traveling a you know a meter or so I think in terms of rave culture of the of the late
80s early 90s so any of those come back that seems to be quite a stoical thing it's a mainly upper
body stuff so I think there's a lot of research to be done here yeah yeah I'm sure Shakira could
clock up some numbers with a bum shake I'm sure if it was attached to the thigh that would give
vigorous well you're going to get a really accurate reading because our hips don't lie of course
well this is do you remember the film that they shoot horses don't they which was it was about
marath this terrible thing that was done during the depression in America which was marathon dance
competitions where you just danced and the winner would then get some money when everyone was desperate
for money but they would go on for days and days people actually died dancing yeah I would imagine
no one if they'd had a pedometer that would have already gone down to the pawnbroker so they wouldn't
have had that on that because that was why they were there but it's just that fascinating thing
where you know dance becomes torture and I think when you talk about 25 mars I mean that amount of
dancing I'm reckoning if we went for a walk that's what seven to eight hours of walking uh six
six hours probably I walk fast because I have places to go and I believe life is finite but there's a
lot of dawdlers and I would say between dawdlers and then kind of people like me I reckon it's about
3.2 miles an hour so that's a lot yeah wow because Anna and I have been for a walk in the park every
now and then just to kind of chat work and I must say that is probably the best workout I've had in
the last two years trying to keep up with Anna walking around a park it's ridiculous yeah it was
awkward when I realized you'd collapsed so are you one of those people like me which is I don't
mind stopping and looking at things and I don't mind having a slow walk if there's things around but
the dawdle is something which because you know there's a certain way that some people what where
you go you have no ambition you know that there's a way that you just I am like you yes I judge someone's
entire character a level of ambition based on their walk and then I'm furious with them and kind
of want to push them in front of a car and they deserve it well the worst thing was you had to
push me half a mile out of the park to get to the road I did yeah really went for it but yeah I would
have been clocking up those those 25 miles and they said even at the time these women said that
it was really addictive just like it is today whenever anyone has step counters because it made
a little tick every time you stepped and so you couldn't resist making this tick happen and people
were worried their mother said they're dancing too much it's dangerous and I think some of them
maybe rigged it because there's this thing with pedometers about whether it's about steps or whether
it's about distance and of course this would tell you how much distance you traveled but that was
because you had to set it to your step length so I think you could set it to anywhere between 15
and 41 inch step length so if as a cheating lady you said every step you step 41 inches then that's
going to say you've traveled further isn't it wow so the modern day pedometers came after the
Tokyo Olympics in the 1960s and there was a Japanese company called Yamatsa the Yamatsa company
and they came up with this new kind of pedometer and they thought that everyone should walk 10,000
steps a day and there's a lot of controversy whether that is just a completely random number
that they made up or whether there's actually any science to it whatsoever and there is a
professor of epidemiology at Harvard called Aimin Lee and she reckons having spoken to the people
who came up with the idea that they chose 10,000 because the Japanese character for 10,000 looks
a little bit like a man walking and they thought it would be a really good way of publicizing it
but then there are other people who say well actually they did a bit of maths about it and
worked out how many people would have less mortality due to more exercise and stuff so
yeah pedometers are the subject of the longest movie ever made I discovered the longest movie
ever now previously on fish we spoke about the longest movie ever made being called ambience
which was 720 hours long the trailer itself was 72 minutes that has since been overtaken by a movie
which is 857 hours long so this was made in 2008 by Erica Magnussen and Daniel Anderson
and they wanted to look at where the pedometer came from so they had this idea of following the
production cycle but in reverse chronological order so basically it's an 857 hour long movie
backwards wow this this sounds actually I would almost rather read Joan Feynman's dissertation
than watch that that's amazing there's a lot of reviews on imdb you know as it starts off slow
says one person post three and a half days of runtime kind of boring but oh my god by the
fourth through to the 25th days things really pick up so you know check it out what do we know
what the point is was it some sort of artistic experiment was it a bet it's definitely an
artistic experiment yeah they didn't just plan to make a feature length film and it got out of
hand they just had so much material and a bad editor they can be dangerous can't they pedometers
and Fitbits and stuff there was a a pig in northern england the Eta pedometer pood it out
and it was in a bit of warm poo and hay and because it had a lithium ion battery it exploded
and set fire to the entire farm there luckily no animals were hurt sounds so much like an
insurance scam to me I'm sorry but you know when you go when you know when the farmers making up the
story when they just had things haven't really worked out on my pig farm and you will not believe
what happened right so I left the pedometer over there and he's always been 100 I would not pay out
on that one surely that's more likely to be true than I dropped it in the toilet or something for
your like it's it's who would make that no no but I'm not I'm not talking about the claiming
insurance on the pedometer I'm talking about claiming insurance on the entire farm cause yeah
you've got to get bigger ambition James yeah yeah you need an arsonist don't you but you can't say
there was a crime committed because then the police get involved so if you say it was the pig then
who's going to arrest a pig oh in France and I'm sure you've covered many pig trials on this show
still one of my one of the greatest films if people haven't seen the hour of the pig it's
brilliant for it's all about a pig trial and was it is it a pedometer based crime no it's
it's pre-pedometer and it starts off beautifully with a man and his donkey about to be hanged for
some sexual shenanigans so there's a donkey with a noose around it and the man with a noose
around it and this man running through and he's going stop stop stop and you see the man go
and he goes the donkey has been pardoned everyone in the town has said it is on good character
and then you see the donkey's news taken off and the man dropped from the gallows
I mean I'm definitely watching that and I think that's going to be the one takeaway from this podcast
yeah
okay it is time for fact number three and that is James okay my fact this week is that
Charles Darwin invented the office chair did he well did he that's a great question Anna did
yeah so that's my skepticism I'm gonna go on I'm gonna say that he invented the kind of
wheelie office chair that you have and I'm saying that because his chair had wheels on and this is
the first example we know of I was reading an article in the New York Times it was a review
of a book called a taxonomy of office chairs by Jonathan Olivares and he talked about all the
history of office chairs and he said that Charles Darwin had a customized wooden armchair in his
home and he would wheel around his front room looking from specimen to specimen and then I
went onto the welcome collections website and they have a photograph of this very chair so it
definitely did exist they have a photo of the interior of Charles Darwin's study which shows
that it's kind of just like an old armchair with just casters on the bottom of it okay but yeah
the evolution of the chair started from there yeah the origin of this species of chair yes
Robin I assume you've been to Darwin's house have you seen this chair no I haven't that's what I was
thinking about I kind of flash back think have I seen that a downhouse and and I don't remember
seeing that but they don't let you have a go on the furniture so that's the thing is it depends how
discreet it is you know and especially they would have all known I'm a big Starlight Express fan so
of course that would have crashed yeah I mean I love the idea of that wheelchair going around his
wonderful thought pathway he would go round and round and I think there's something rather
attractive about that idea so what is that he used to walk around just to think of things
throughout the day he would have these moments when he would basically have some stones in his
pocket and he would make a little pile of stones so he would know roughly how many times he'd walked
round and it would just be to take himself into somewhere else to just mull over whatever he'd
recently found out about a pigeon skeleton or whatever else had been boiled down but I mean
going back to what we talked about with Joan Feynman as well that curiosity and that play
yeah now I want to go and have a look at this particular crab that's over there and now I'll
look at this barnacle over there and that lovely thing when he would go to London Zoo and and he
would look at some of the viper snakes and he would see if he could stop himself from reacting
so obviously the snake can't get to him and he would just stand and just look at the snake wait
for it to strike and they are I still react you know and that that's just plain people would have
walked past them and who's the guy over there with the big sideboards who's looks like he's goading
snakes but I've just recently been to London Zoo and my experience is very different that the
snakes just kind of hide and you spend half your time going is that a twig or is it a snake I'm
not sure they didn't do much of the attacking when I was there although I did that's that's that's
the fun thing isn't it of I mean Edinburgh Zoo I think used to be the zoo that had the most hiding
animals to the point where you began to think this is predominantly hay but I love that reptile
house is such a delight I think because you see that you know the old structure of the zoo there
I absolutely love looking at the snakes I don't know I'm starting to think the zoos might be
in other northern lights they're just a huge con only when Joanna Lumley goes so the snakes emerge
but yeah he was from like a super early age crazily curious wasn't he and not a very good
student so I hadn't realized that Darwin's dad thought he was a bit useless said that you know
this boy will never concentrate on anything but he just was obsessed with collecting stuff
there was one story where he found two unusual looking beetles that he thought were new species
and then he found the third one and so he put one of the two in his mouth so he could carry the third
one home as well I don't know why he couldn't just carry two beetles in one hand but he put it in his
mouth and he accidentally bit down on it or it squirted some disgusting poison into his mouth
so sadly lost his beetles on that occasion wow always collecting it's like with his his barnacles
which is Steve Jones who's a wonderful writer I'm sure you know and he is a great expert on
Darwin and I once said to him are there any books by Darwin that I shouldn't read and he said don't
bother with these books about barnacles he became overly obsessed so there's a story of I forget which
son it was who was so used to seeing Charles just looking at barnacles all the time and they were
being delivered from around the world people sending specimens barnacles to him that when he
went around to a friend's house he started running around all the rooms and became increasingly
confused and rather upset because he couldn't find the room where his friend's father did his
barnacles and that was when it had to be explained that not all parents spend most of their time
examining barnacles I think that's you know there's a all father doing barnacles don't I know I was
reading about what happened when his son William was born he just started measuring everything
the sneezing the hiccuping the yawning the stretching right but the papers are amazing
because they really read like a very proud father who kind of thinks that his children are so advanced
he's like um of course sucking and screaming were well performed by my infant he wrote at one stage
and then he said I touched the naked stole of his foot with a bit of paper and he jerked it away
much like an older child would do when tickled oh no he's one of the parents at the school gate
my child's two good children I used to work in a children's bookshop where you would always get
people coming in and going uh my um son is four but he has a reading age of 10 and of course you
would show them a book for a 10 year old go well I don't think he'll quite be able to manage that
and then eventually when you sold them a book for a two year old uh but you know but that was
we're often told that Victorian parents were quite detached from their children I think it's
kind of quite a myth and you would see that the relationship that Charles and Emma Darwin had
with their children was incredible closeness there's so many beautiful letters between Emma and Charles
which are filled with love and which entirely disintegrate some of the illusions that we have
about Victorian behavior right wow um he had a really cool uncle who sadly died quite young who
looked like he might have made a lot of innovations in the medical world and he was called Charles
Darwin as well and Charles Darwin the one we're talking about was fascinated by him even visiting
the university where he worked at to meet his professors to say hi because he never met him
he died before Charles was born but when he was young he had a stammer and there was a theory
that his father had that if he taught his son French he would get rid of the stammer so he was
packed off to Paris where he learned and studied under a reverend who taught him to speak French
fluently and it got rid of his stammer but only in French so he always had a stammer in English
but never in French it's quite weird to picture Darwin's trip on the beagle right because that
was just one huge massacre and for someone who was kind of too squeamish to be a doctor when he
was training to be a doctor he once ran from the room because someone was being operated on
but he did love shooting and like we'll just go around like bashing things on the head strangling
them you know poisoning them and eating them all for science all for science and a bit for fun
one of the things he did was he ate lots of tortoises which we've probably mentioned before
and this was one of the things that tipped him off to evolution he ate a tortoise on one island
and then he ate what seemed to be the same tortoise on another island really close by
and it tasted a bit sweeter and this is one of the things he recorded he was like why is the
tortoise on this island sweeter than the tortoise on this island how have they diverged you know
why would God do this make these tiny little differences so close together but wait a minute
how come everything has evolved to taste like chicken then he didn't actually didn't address that
there's a line that i've often repeated in fact the most recent book i wrote originally this is
what i wanted to call it because it's something that i love which is when he talks about being around
the rainforest and he says one's eyes attempt to follow the flight of a gaudy butterfly but
is soon distracted by some strange tree or fruit today my mind was a chaos of delight
and i think that's the thing chaos of delight which is a phrase i've used many many times
is such a good way of explaining what the truly curious are always being attracted to yeah well
and also as well as delighting in your discoveries getting so angry when things go wrong you know
just being passionate generally like one of my favorite letters i read of darwin's recently
was when he'd been looking into bees that pollinate red clover some had a long proboscis some had a
short one and they got nectar in different ways quite a niche discovery he thought he'd made
he told his friend john lubeck said i'm really excited about this and then he wrote a follow-up
saying he'd realized that he was wrong and he said i do hope you haven't wasted any time for
my stupid blunder i hate myself i hate clover and i hate bees and that's yeah speaking of finding
beauty in the banal what about office chairs we quickly talk about those maybe
chairs are killing us chairs are killing us what because chair sitting puts 30 more pressure
on your spinal discs than standing up varicose veins only exist in cultures that do lots of chair
sitting if you sit down for long periods it means your muscles and your legs don't fire which means
your pancreas doesn't get the message to produce lipase which is the enzyme that you need in your
liver to digest fat and there is an amazing person called professor galen cramps who says basically
we all need to stop sitting down too much because it's killing us and i spoke to professor cramps
this morning and she was basically telling me that there's loads of massive studies with epidemiologists
looking at really really really massive data sets and they have found correlation with premature
mortality and sitting down which is greater than the correlation for being old being fat or being a
smoker so sitting down according to some studies is more dangerous than that and for that reason
professor cramps doesn't have any chairs in her house i read this in an article she's a terrible
host doesn't she if you go around yeah okay in fairness she has a couple for when guests come
round she did say i read this in an article from new scientists about 20 years ago and i emailed
professor cramps says is it still true that you don't have any chairs in your house and she says
yeah she's continued that experiment for over 20 years and she perches at the kitchen island when
she wants to eat she thinks that perching is a good way it's like half sitting and half standing
whenever she's doing any work on her computer she always uses a she's long
even as a guest if she did put the two chairs out you'd feel so judged sitting in them wouldn't you
wouldn't risk it but yeah like so there's obviously a lot of chat about how sitting's
bad for you now and standing desk which i have are useful and i also try squatting because i think
about a quarter of people when they're at rest or when they're at work they will adopt a squat
rather than a seat so a quarter of people in the world that's around the world yeah absolutely
sorry not in the office but i've tried squatting and you can't do it for long or i can't
i always try working in a squat at a low table and i think once you've had 30 years of not doing it
it's pretty hard to get back isn't it well yeah that is the problem actually it's like all these
things about not sitting down really once you've been sitting down for 30 years doing anything
else can put a lot of pressure on your body and give you pain and discomfort but we know that in
history people have squatted more than they've sat and not least because we haven't found many
chairs from history but also because when you squat down the end of your shin bone kind of presses
into a little bone on your ankle and it gets a little indentation and we can see by lots of old
skeletons that that's how people must have spent a lot of their time so we know that in history
squatting has been the standard way of resting okay you know one thing i really loved about this fact
was such a seminal character is the person who we have the oldest example of a of an office chair
from but also a bit further back in history the oldest example that we have of the swivel chair
is from thomas jefferson the story goes is that he wrote up the declaration of independence while
sitting on this swivel chair because it has a little table that is attached to it and a revolutionary
chair very nice he also had a pedometer thomas jefferson yeah the earliest ones we know about
yeah he had it made by an expert watchmaker in paris and he even sent one to one of the
early presidents i think it was madison maybe yeah but he gave his swivel chair to martha
didn't he his daughter and she said that she thinks he did indeed write the declaration of
independence on it and his opponents took the piss out of him for his stupid chairs and called them
whirligigs and said you know they look at thomas and his stupid whirligig that allows him to look
in all directions at once isn't he and moron they didn't say that that's my addition
okay it is time for our final fact of the show and that is my fact my fact this week is that horror
movies often have two soundtracks one you can hear and one you can't oh well i know that sounds
spooky but it is literally for spooky reasons so this is the idea of infrasound and infrasound is
any frequency that is sort of 19 hertz below so humans can hear 20 hertz and above as soon as you
get lower it becomes out of earshot but your body can sort of feel the sensation of the sound if
there's a big sound system in the room you can give you a sense of sort of oh what's going on here
you know it it can give you the shivers do you know any examples of movies that have done this
like sound of music presumably not but well it's mainly the examples that they give are for thriller
slash horror movies so irreversible was said to have used it and paranormal activity is rumored
to have used it as well they sometimes are sounds that are like i don't know a fan going or an air
conditioner but they play with the bass as such that it creates an eerie noise i did read the air
conditioning can achieve this effect which maybe explains why being in the office is such a scary
experience peacocks can do it if a peacock kind of wiggles its tail it makes this really really
deep sound that humans can't hear but if you were able to hear it it'd be about as loud as a car
driving past you and they do it to kind of signal to each other but yeah i guess if you walk past
a peacock you might feel a bit uneasy does that happen you feel like a lot of eyes are watching
you well that's the famous darwin line the sight of the feathers in a peacock tail make me sick
really yeah he felt that the that expenditure felt like such a waste for the nature of survival
but you have to have that huge expenditure and and it's such a lovely line because it feels like
a very modern line you don't expect to suddenly find that in in darwin no as a horror movie fan
i'm not keen on this idea because i'm a big fan of atmospheric horror films which really get
under your skin in fact brilliantly you mentioned sound and music isn't it amazing how quickly
you can create some kind of sense of synchronicity in any of these programs yeah you know i think it
was it was it uh it was robert wise i think he directed sound and music and he also directed
the haunting and that is one of those films where so much of the unsettling nature of it is not that
you ever see a ghost but you hear noises there's a sense that there is something wrong with the house
yeah well it's whenever i watch horror films i was watching horror film on my own recently
actually and the way to find it not scary is absolutely not to close your eyes it's to just
cover up your ears and immediately a horror film will become completely innocuous it's so weird i
think it's more about the sound hitchcock said that 33 percent of the effect of psycho was entirely
due to the music yeah they did do test audiences with the movie where in the shower scene there was
no music originally and it just didn't have the impact and then they put the music on and suddenly
the scariest scene in cinema to that point yeah that's really interesting what was the horror
film you were watching by the way uh it was called his house my house her house it's fantastic it's
really good yeah his house if yeah anyone listen to this if you've not seen it i think it was nominated
for about the very deservedly i was just watching it at home and i was like i hope it stops being
scary because i want to go to the loo and i'm not sure i can risk going down these stairs now because
the changing understanding of the narrative in it and that's why i find that kind of use of
infrasound to me that feels like a very hollywood thing which is going oh we can do this thing instead
no do you know what film something brilliantly yeah but then do you want to get rid of soundtracks
altogether then for that reason as well no i love i love soundtracks because i think when
they're well used when you get uh i mean like i rewatch dawn of the dead which it has a really
upbeat and you go this is far too upbeat for the number of guts that are being eaten but
it works by being this meeting of two very different worlds but that marriage reminds
me of tubular bells to me it is terrifying and that's not a frightening tune that's just because
it was in the exorcist and that's actually quite a plinky plonky you know the tune the terrifying
bit from the exorcist like it's quite hard to hum um but yeah it's marrying that slightly chirpy
with the terrifying do you think we're going to get sued do you think um michael field's gonna
come in he's coming for us yeah after anna sang that thank god his daughter used to work for qi so
that she's she's been on fish chat to her she has molly back in the day i love that way though
how can we get away with uh playing a tune and not having to pay copyright by not really remembering
it very well you can't play it you know it's that michael field um just on um horror films in their
soundtracks i didn't know that instruments have specifically been built for horror movies so in
harmonic instruments basically instruments that do the opposite of what good instruments do and
they create notes that don't go together very naturally when you sort of all my instruments
do that oh yeah yeah no there are many reasons why you might make in harmonic sounds but the most
famous in harmonic instrument is probably the waterphone and so it's like a bowl and it's got
like bronze rods that stick up out of the edges of the bowl and they're all different lengths
and like diameters and stuff and you get a violin bow or something maybe to tap it and you bow the
rods and they just make a very non-harmonic sound and it's used in lots of films it's used
in poltergeist let the right one in aliens but what i like about it as well is that the waterphone
involves a little bit of water in the bowl which is why it's called that it was invented by richard
waters and used in the horror film dark water amazing oh wow three totally unrelated waters in one
fact that's so cool the other thing's the tritone kind of two notes that one comes after the other
and it kind of makes you feel uneasy because you think that should be something next it's in the
theme to the simpsons so you know when it goes the simpsons it's kind of you think well where are
you going after that it's weird it's just kind of a weird kind of two notes coming after each other
is that the one banned in churches james or is that a different one well that's the one that the
internet says was banned in churches for sure whether it was actually banned i personally don't
think so but definitely western musicians really shied away from it for hundreds and hundreds
of years because they thought it was slightly demonic it is objectively spooky because i've
never thought about it before but the theme tune to the simpsons which is not a spooky show except
for the halloween specials is kind of scary regardless of content i don't know why they did
that weird danny elfman of oingo boingo which is still one of the greatest names for a band really
yeah so funny doesn't he sing he sings that bit of the simpsons doesn't he and as a result the
royalties that he's received ever since uh so far greater than any other work that he's done
basically did i sing it close enough to the actual theme tune that i'm gonna have to send him a tenor
in the post yeah dammit like yeah i remember doing a thing with i've forgotten her name who's
who's the voice of uh bart nancy nancy cartwright yeah i remember doing a radio show with her and
there was someone in the audience who had a birthday like a little child and they said oh can you
say happy birthday as as bart simpsons she went no i can't for copyright reasons really wow really
weird thing that's what would and i tell you guys about the most recent um horror movie i watched
perhaps we're doing that um it was called slacks have you heard of this s la xx can you guess what
the murderer is in this case i'll give you a clue it's a non-human is it a pair of it's a pair of
shoes it's not oh it's not a pair of slacks it's a pair of slacks but that's not what slacks are
for many oh god there's trousers on there it's about a killer pair of jeans uh and i was just
googling about it see if there's anything interesting about it and it comes up on a lot of lists of
horror movies where the antagonist is a non-human or non-animal so there was one in 2001 called the
shaft can you guess what the killer was there yes a um elevator shaft but why is the shaft itself
the killer well it was originally called the lift but it got remade in america they called
it the shaft and also they were going to call it just down uh and the tagline for that movie reads
take the stairs for god's sake take the stairs sounds amazing anyone going to see it imagining
it's a remake of the film shaft they'll find themselves very confused i hope isek hay still
did the music of the wires yeah that'd be amazing has anyone seen the movie this is relatively famous
called rubber is that a tire that goes through the desert and goes yeah yeah yeah that's a great
idea yeah it's about a sentient tire that goes around and it has psychokinesis we never learned
why it has psychokinesis but it could just look at you and start vibrating and then it explodes you
uh and there was the final one which was a korean movie i think and it's called the red shoes can you
guess what the killer is there oh it is is this a trick is it purple Dorothy it's a pair of purple
shoes literally no idea why they call it the red shoes but this woman finds a pair of purple high
heels uh and then jealousy greed and death follows her wherever she walks in them right but the
original red shoes based on the kind of folktale which is a pal and press burger film is a very
haunting piece of work Robert Heltman famously the the child catcher who for many of my generation
is one of the scariest characters in chit chit bang bang you know come come and get your sweeties
children come and get your sweeties and there's a lovely story of when a friend of Robert Heltman
took his kids to go and see chit chit bang bang and uh then he he rang up Robert Heltman he said
Robert i've got a bit of a problem you're coming around for sunday lunch and uh well my kids i've
just taken chit chit bang bang and they were absolutely terrified of you and he went oh yes
he said well could you say something to them over the phone now just so that they know you're an actor
and that you're not really the child's catcher you went of course just bring the children to the
phone and when the children got to the phone you went i'm coming to catch you chit chit bang
okay that's it that is all of our facts thank you so much for listening if you'd like to get
in contact with any of us about the things that we have said over the course of this podcast
we can all be found on our twitter accounts i am on at shribeland james at james harkin robin at
robin ins and anna you can email podcast at qi.com yep but you can go to our group account which
is at no such thing or go to our website no such thing as a fish.com and check out everything that
is up there from all of our previous episodes as well as all of our upcoming tour dates and if
you're online you're looking at websites why not go over to cosmic shambles.com as well that's
robin's site and it's a huge network of amazing scientists and and general communicators of every
field a comedy you know geology blah blah they're all their artists it's an amazing place full of
amazing people uh check out robin's live dates on robinins.com as well um and go see him for his
book tours his live shows and his tours with with brian cox and god the guy does a hundred things
check out it's all up there anyway we're going to be back again next week with another episode
we'll see you then goodbye
(upbeat music)